🌐 Update deployment documentation to clarify deployment types (#1262)
jupyter-book/mystmd: docs/deployment.md

description: Deploy your MyST site to static HTML or a MyST-aware server.
---

> There are two different kinds of MyST website that can be deployed out of the box:
> - Statically generated sites, which can be served from static site hosts (like GitHub Pages).
> - Dynamically rendered sites, which use a MyST server.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two different ways to host MyST websites online.

- **As a static website**. An HTML file is generated for each page at once. The collection of HTML files and website assets can be served from static site hosts (like [GitHub Pages](https://docs.github.com/en/pages), [Netlify](https://netlify.com), and [ReadTheDocs](https://readthedocs.org)).
- **As an application**. A MyST _server_ is run that dynamically generates pages when a user visits them. Your site can be served by a hosting provider that supports applications (like [Curvenote](https://curvenote.org) or [Vercel](https://vercel.com))

```

The high-level differences between these approaches are outlined in [](#deployment-comparison).
:::{table} High-Level Comparison of MyST Site Deployment Types
:label: deployment-comparison

| Deployment Type | High Performance | Seamless Updates | Static Hosting |
|:---------------:|:----------------:|:----------------:|:--------------:|
|  Static website |         ❌        |         ❌        |        ✅       |
|   MyST server   |         ✅        |         ✅        |        ❌       |
:::

> The [default themes](website-templates.md#themes-bundled-with-myst) for MyST are designed to be MyST servers. Sites deployed in this manner benefit from [performance enhancements](./accessibility-and-performance.md) such as pre-fetching for instant page-transitions, loading indicators, and smaller network payloads. As the MyST themes receive new updates, it is easy to upgrade existing websites that have been deployed upon MyST servers, as the MyST site _content_ is only ever built once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{note} MyST was designed to be deployed as an application
Deploying MyST as an application has many benefits. For example, [performance enhancements](./accessibility-and-performance.md) (like pre-fetching for instant page-transitions, loading indicators, and smaller network payloads) and easier upgrades as new MyST versions are released.

The [default themes](website-templates.md#themes-bundled-with-myst) for MyST are designed to be MyST applications rather than static sites, but the core functionality is equally shared between the two options.
:::
```

%  - Static deployments are MPA (each page own HTML document), SSG (rendered ahead of time)
%  - Servers are SPA (request JSON), SSR+hydration
%- Term definitions?
%  - SPA vs MPA
%  - SSR vs CSR vs SSG

> However, commonly used website hosts like GitHub Pages and ReadTheDocs are _static website hosts_, meaning that they can only serve webpages that have been built ahead of time. Therefore, the choice between using a static website or a MyST server deployment often comes down to the type of website hosting that is available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The choice between static hosts and application-based hosts often comes down to the type of website hosting that is available, and the amount of complexity that you're willing to deal with in deploying your site.
The sections below share a few considerations to help you make a decision.
```

description: Deploy your MyST site to static HTML or a MyST-aware server.
---

There are two different ways to host MyST websites online.

- **As a static website**. An HTML file is generated for each page at once. The collection of HTML files and website assets can be served from static site hosts (like [GitHub Pages](https://docs.github.com/en/pages), [Netlify](https://netlify.com), and [ReadTheDocs](https://readthedocs.org)).

> - **As an application**. A MyST _server_ is run that dynamically generates pages when a user visits them. Your site can be served by a hosting provider that supports applications (like [Curvenote](https://curvenote.org) or [Vercel](https://vercel.com))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **As an application**. A MyST _server_ is run that dynamically generates pages when a user visits them. Your site can be served by a hosting provider that supports applications (like [Curvenote](https://curvenote.com) or [Vercel](https://vercel.com))
```

If you are using Git, add the `_build` folder to your `.gitignore` so that it is not tracked. This folder contains auto-generated assets that can easily be re-built -- for example in a Continuous Integration system like GitHub Actions.
:::

### Deploying to a Static Webhost
The contents of the `_build/html` can be served from any static web server. The following articles outline the process of deploying your static site to well-known website providers:

:::{card} GitHub Pages
:link: ./deployment-github-pages.md
Deploy as a static site to GitHub pages using an action.
:::

:::{card} Netlify
:link: ./deployment-netlify.md
Deploy to Netlify as static HTML, and pull-request previews.
:::

% TODO: ReadTheDocs

> ## Dynamic MyST Sites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Application Websites
```
